<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-4-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Paris. A hall of state.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bishop of Winchester</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Suffolk</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</b>, the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Governor</b>, of Paris, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Winchester</td>
							<td>God save King Henry, of that name the sixth!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, governor of Paris, take your oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That you elect no other king but him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And none your foes but such as shall pretend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Malicious practises against his state:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This shall ye do, so help you righteous God! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fastolfe</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fastolfe</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To haste unto your coronation,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A letter was deliver’d to my hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I vow’d, base knight, when I did meet thee next,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tear the garter from thy craven’s leg, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Plucking it off.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I have done, because unworthily</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wast installed in that high degree.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This dastard, at the battle of Patay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When but in all I was six thousand strong</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that the French were almost ten to one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before we met or that a stroke was given,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a trusty squire did run away:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which assault we lost twelve hundred men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself and divers gentlemen beside</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were there surprised and taken prisoners.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or whether that such cowards ought to wear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To say the truth, this fact was infamous</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ill beseeming any common man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When first this order was ordain’d, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knights of the garter were of noble birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as were grown to credit by the wars;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not fearing death, nor shrinking for distress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But always resolute in most extremes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He then that is not furnish’d in this sort</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Profaning this most honourable order,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And should, if I were worthy to be judge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Stain to thy countrymen, thou hear’st thy doom!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fastolfe</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, my lord protector, view the letter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What means his grace, that he hath changed his style?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more but, plain and bluntly, “To the king!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or doth this churlish superscription</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pretend some alteration in good will?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What’s here? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reads.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>“I have, upon especial cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Moved with compassion of my country’s wreck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together with the pitiful complaints</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of such as your oppression feeds upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forsaken your pernicious faction</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And join’d with Charles, the rightful King of France.”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O monstrous treachery! can this be so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in alliance, amity and oaths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There should be found such false dissembling guile?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>What! doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td>Is that the worst this letter doth contain?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td>It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give him chastisement for this abuse.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How say you, my lord? are you not content?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I should have begg’d I might have been employ’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then gather strength and march unto him straight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what offence it is to flout his friends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I go, my lord, in heart desiring still</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You may behold confusion of your foes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Basset</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</td>
							<td>Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Basset</td>
							<td>And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be patient, lords; and give them leave to speak.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</td>
							<td>With him, my lord; for he hath done me wrong.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Basset</td>
							<td>And I with him; for he hath done me wrong.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What is that wrong whereof you both complain?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First let me know, and then I’ll answer you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Basset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Crossing the sea from England into France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upbraided me about the rose I wear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did represent my master’s blushing cheeks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When stubbornly he did repugn the truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About a certain question in the law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With other vile and ignominious terms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In confutation of which rude reproach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in defence of my lord’s worthiness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I crave the benefit of law of arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that is my petition, noble lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For though he seem with forged quaint conceit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To set a gloss upon his bold intent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he first took exceptions at this badge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bewray’d the faintness of my master’s heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though ne’er so cunningly you smother it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When for so slight and frivolous a cause</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such factious emulations shall arise!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let this dissension first be tried by fight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then your highness shall command a peace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td>There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</td>
							<td>Nay, let it rest where it began at first.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Basset</td>
							<td>Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gloucester</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And perish ye, with your audacious prate!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With this immodest clamorous outrage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To trouble and disturb the king and us?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, my lords, methinks you do not well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear with their perverse objections;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much less to take occasion from their mouths</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me persuade you take a better course.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</td>
							<td>It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come hither, you that would be combatants:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you, my lords, remember where we are,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If they perceive dissension in our looks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that within ourselves we disagree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How will their grudging stomachs be provoked</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wilful disobedience, and rebel!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beside, what infamy will there arise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When foreign princes shall be certified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for a toy, a thing of no regard,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Henry’s peers and chief nobility</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Destroy’d themselves, and lost the realm of France!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, think upon the conquest of my father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tender years, and let us not forego</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That for a trifle that was bought with blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I see no reason, if I wear this rose, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Putting on a red rose.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>That any one should therefore be suspicious</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I more incline to Somerset than York:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well they may upbraid me with my crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crown’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But your discretions better can persuade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than I am able to instruct or teach:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, as we hither came in peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So let us still continue peace and love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cousin of York, we institute your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be our regent in these parts of France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go cheerfully together and digest.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your angry choler on your enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ourself, my lord protector and the rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>After some respite will return to Calais;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From thence to England; where I hope ere long</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be presented, by your victories,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Charles, Alençon and that traitorous rout. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Vernon</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of York, I promise you, the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prettily, methought, did play the orator.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And so he did; but yet I like it not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that he wears the badge of Somerset.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>An if I wist he did⁠—but let it rest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Other affairs must now be managed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Exeter</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, had the passions of thy heart burst out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear we should have seen decipher’d there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than yet can be imagined or supposed.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But howsoe’er, no simple man that sees</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This jarring discord of nobility,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This shouldering of each other in the court,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This factious bandying of their favourites,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that it doth presage some ill event.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis much when sceptres are in children’s hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But more when envy breeds unkind division;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There comes the rain, there begins confusion. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Before Bourdeaux.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b>, with trump and drum.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Summon their general unto the wall. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpet sounds. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">General</b> and others, aloft.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Servant in arms to Harry King of England;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus he would: Open your city gates;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be humble to us; call my sovereign yours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do him homage as obedient subjects;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I’ll withdraw me and my bloody power:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, if you frown upon this proffer’d peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You tempt the fury of my three attendants,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who in a moment even with the earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you forsake the offer of their love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">General</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our nation’s terror and their bloody scourge!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The period of thy tyranny approacheth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On us thou canst not enter but by death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, I protest, we are well fortified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And strong enough to issue out and fight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On either hand thee there are squadrons pitch’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wall thee from the liberty of flight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And no way canst thou turn thee for redress,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But death doth front thee with apparent spoil</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And pale destruction meets thee in the face.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten thousand French have ta’en the sacrament</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To rive their dangerous artillery</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, there thou stand’st, a breathing valiant man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of an invincible unconquer’d spirit!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the latest glory of thy praise</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ere the glass, that now begins to run,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Finish the process of his sandy hour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall see thee wither’d, bloody, pale and dead. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum afar off.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hark! hark! the Dauphin’s drum, a warning bell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mine shall ring thy dire departure out. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">General</b>, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He fables not; I hear the enemy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, negligent and heedless discipline!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How are we park’d and bounded in a pale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A little herd of England’s timorous deer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we be English deer, be then in blood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make the cowards stand aloof at bay:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sell every man his life as dear as mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God and Saint George, Talbot and England’s right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-3" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Plains in Gascony.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b> that meets <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b>. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">York</b> with trumpet and many Soldiers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Are not the speedy scouts return’d again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That dogg’d the mighty army of the Dauphin?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They are return’d, my lord, and give it out</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he is march’d to Bourdeaux with his power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fight with Talbot: as he march’d along,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By your espials were discovered</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which join’d with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A plague upon that villain Somerset,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus delays my promised supply</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am lowted by a traitor villain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cannot help the noble chevalier:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God comfort him in this necessity!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he miscarry, farewell wars in France. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir William Lucy</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou princely leader of our English strength,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never so needful on the earth of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who now is girdled with a waist of iron</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hemm’d about with grim destruction:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Else, farewell Talbot, France, and England’s honour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbot’s place!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So should we save a valiant gentleman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>O, send some succor to the distress’d lord!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All ’long of this vile traitor Somerset.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then God take mercy on brave Talbot’s soul;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on his son young John, who two hours since</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I met in travel toward his warlike father!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This seven years did not Talbot see his son;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now they meet where both their lives are done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">York</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bid his young son welcome to his grave?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away! vexation almost stops my breath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sunder’d friends greet in the hour of death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lucy, farewell; no more my fortune can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Long all of Somerset and his delay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, with his soldiers.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus, while the vulture of sedition</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever living man of memory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-4" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Other plains in Gascony.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</b>, with his army; a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</b> of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b>’s with him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is too late; I cannot send them now:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This expedition was by York and Talbot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too rashly plotted: all our general force</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might with a sally of the very town</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be buckled with: the over-daring Talbot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>York set him on to fight and die in shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Captain</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Set from our o’ermatch’d forces forth for aid. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir William Lucy</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>How now, Sir William! whither were you sent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, ring’d about with bold adversity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cries out for noble York and Somerset,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To beat assailing death from his weak legions:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And whiles the honourable captain there</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, his false hopes, the trust of England’s honour,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let not your private discord keep away</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The levied succors that should lend him aid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While he, renowned noble gentleman,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yields up his life unto a world of odds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alençon, Reignier, compass him about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Talbot perisheth by your default.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>York set him on; York should have sent him aid.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And York as fast upon your grace exclaims;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swearing that you withhold his levied host,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Collected for this expedition.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>York lies; he might have sent and had the horse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I owe him little duty, and less love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The fraud of England, not the force of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath now entrapp’d the noble-minded Talbot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never to England shall he bear his life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But dies, betray’d to fortune by your strife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within six hours they will be at his aid.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Too late comes rescue: he is ta’en or slain;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For fly he could not, if he would have fled;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And fly would Talbot never, though he might.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Somerset</td>
							<td>If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td>His fame lives in the world, his shame in you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-5" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The English camp near Bourdeaux.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">John</b> his son.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O young John Talbot! I did send for thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To tutor thee in stratagems of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That Talbot’s name might be in thee revived</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When sapless age and weak unable limbs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, O malignant and ill-boding stars!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now thou art come unto a feast of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A terrible and unavoided danger:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I’ll direct thee how thou shalt escape</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is my name Talbot? and am I your son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And shall I fly? O if you love my mother,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dishonour not her honourable name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make a bastard and a slave of me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The world will say, he is not Talbot’s blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td>He that flies so will ne’er return again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>If we both stay, we both are sure to die.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then let me stay; and, father, do you fly:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your loss is great, so your regard should be;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon my death the French can little boast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But mine it will, that no exploit have done:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You fled for vantage, everyone will swear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, if I bow, they’ll say it was for fear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no hope that ever I will stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If the first hour I shrink and run away.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here on my knee I beg mortality,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rather than life preserved with infamy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Shall all thy mother’s hopes lie in one tomb?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td>Ay, rather than I’ll shame my mother’s womb.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Upon my blessing, I command thee go.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td>To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Part of thy father may be saved in thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td>No part of him but will be shame in me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td>Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td>Thy father’s charge shall clear thee from that stain.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You cannot witness for me, being slain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If death be so apparent, then both fly.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And leave my followers here to fight and die?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My age was never tainted with such shame.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No more can I be sever’d from your side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For live I will not, if my father die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, side by side together live and die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And soul with soul from France to heaven fly. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-6" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h3>
				<p>A field of battle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum: excursions, wherein <b epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</b> is hemmed about, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b> rescues him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Saint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The regent hath with Talbot broke his word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And left us to the rage of France his sword.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The life thou gavest me first was lost and done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my determined time thou gavest new date.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>When from the Dauphin’s crest thy sword struck fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It warm’d thy father’s heart with proud desire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quicken’d with youthful spleen and warlike rage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beat down Alençon, Orleans, Burgundy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And interchanging blows I quickly shed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of his bastard blood; and in disgrace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bespoke him thus; “Contaminated, base</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy father’s care,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now thou art seal’d the son of chivalry?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The help of one stands me in little stead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, too much folly is it, well I wot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hazard all our lives in one small boat!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I to-day die not with Frenchmen’s rage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-morrow I shall die with mickle age:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By me they nothing gain an if I stay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis but the shortening of my life one day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thee thy mother dies, our household’s name,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My death’s revenge, thy youth, and England’s fame:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All these and more we hazard by thy stay;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On that advantage, bought with such a shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The coward horse that bears me fail and die!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And like me to the peasant boys of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be shame’s scorn and subject of mischance!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Surely, by all the glory you have won,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An if I fly, I am not Talbot’s son:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If son to Talbot, die at Talbot’s foot.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou wilt fight, fight by thy father’s side;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, commendable proved, let’s die in pride. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-4-7" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Another part of the field.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarum: excursions. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</b> led by a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Where is my other life? mine own is gone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, where’s young Talbot? where is valiant John?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Triumphant death, smear’d with captivity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Young Talbot’s valour makes me smile at thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His bloody sword he brandish’d over me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like a hungry lion, did commence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But when my angry guardant stood alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tendering my ruin and assail’d of none,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Suddenly made him from my side to start</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the clustering battle of the French;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in that sea of blood my boy did drench</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His over-mounting spirit, and there died,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Servant</td>
							<td>O, my dear lord, lo, where your son is borne! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter Soldiers, with the body of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">John Talbot</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Talbot</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou antic death, which laugh’st us here to scorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy despite shall ’scape mortality.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favour’d death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had death been French, then death had died to-day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, come and lay him in his father’s arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My spirit can no longer bear these harms.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now my old arms are young John Talbot’s grave. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dies.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alençon</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard of Orleans</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Joan la Pucelle</b>, and forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We should have found a bloody day of this.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How the young whelp of Talbot’s, raging-wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmen’s blood!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pucelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Once I encounter’d him, and thus I said:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Thou maiden youth, be vanquish’d by a maid:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, with a proud majestical high scorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He answer’d thus: “Young Talbot was not born</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the pillage of a giglot wench:”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, rushing in the bowels of the French,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Burgundy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Doubtless he would have made a noble knight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>See, where he lies inhearsed in the arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bastard</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose life was England’s glory, Gallia’s wonder.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, no, forbear! for that which we have fled</span>
									<br/>
									<span>During the life, let us not wrong it dead. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir William Lucy</b>, attended; Herald of the French preceding.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Herald, conduct me to the Dauphin’s tent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td>On what submissive message art thou sent?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Submission, Dauphin! ’tis a mere French word;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We English warriors wot not what it means.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to know what prisoners thou hast ta’en</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to survey the bodies of the dead.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>For prisoners ask’st thou? hell our prison is.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But tell me whom thou seek’st.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But where’s the great Alcides of the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Created, for his rare success in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knight of the noble order of Saint George,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great marshal to Henry the Sixth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all his wars within the realm of France?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pucelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here is a silly stately style indeed!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Writes not so tedious a style as this.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmen’s only scourge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your kingdom’s terror and black Nemesis?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that I could but call these dead to life!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It were enough to fright the realm of France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were but his picture left amongst you here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It would amaze the proudest of you all.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give them burial as beseems their worth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pucelle</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I think this upstart is old Talbot’s ghost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For God’s sake let him have ’em; to keep them here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They would but stink, and putrefy the air.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td>Go, take their bodies hence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lucy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll bear them hence; but from their ashes shall be rear’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So we be rid of them, do with ’em what thou wilt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All will be ours, now bloody Talbot’s slain. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
